# Navigating Batemans Bay

Namadgi 3 will be located at the Batemans Bay Marina from September to December 2017. This affords CORC members the opportunity
access the boat with a short drive from Canberra. It also offers some lovely cruising spots up and down the NSW coast.

The Committee has noted that Bateman's Bay is open waters and presents a range of challenges to skippers and crew beyond those 
found in Pittwater.

The purpose of this note is to alert Members to a number of navigational challenges that may be met while sailing Namadgi 3 in
and around Bateman's Bay

The Clyde River Bar

This bar is located about 200m off the end of the rock wall. It is an extended area of shallows with a sandy bottom.

It's shallow depth and the likelyhood of breaking waves in heavy seas means that the bar must be treated with the utmost respect.

* Approach and depart the bar along the marked leads
* Check tides to ensure adequate water for N3's 2.2m draft
* All crew to wear PFDs while crossing the bar
* If in doubt do not cross the bar
* I unable to cross the bar when returning from sea, pick up a mooring at North Head (or anchor behind Snapper Island) and
wait for conditions to improve

Open Waters
Pittwater is a well protected area in which we have enjoy cruising without significant seas or swell. Bateman's Bay is regarded 
as open waters offering minimial protection from ocean swells and sea waves.

* do not venture into the Bay if you are concerned about your open water seamanship skills
* be prepared to deal with sea sickness amongst the crew
* obtain weather forcasts and take early action to avoid being caught in a Southerly change or strong NE blow common
during summer afternoons

Clyde River Bridge
The bridge over the Clyde River at Batemans Bay is a local icon. It's lifting span allows some sailing vessels to access
the river up to Nelligen. 

*DO NOT ATTEMPT TO TAKE NAMADGI 3 UNDER THE BRIDGE*  

N3's air draft is 21m and the bridge span only lifts to 20m -- N3 will NOT fit under the bridge. Even if N3 were able to pass the 
bridge, greater dangers lerk. The High Voltage power cables upstream of the bridge sit only 15m abover the high water mark and
represent a potential fatal hazard to N3 crew. 

DO NOT attempt to take N3 upstream of the bridge under any circumstances.

Tidal currents

Tidal currents in the Clyde River can be very strong. Expect to experience currents of up to 4 knots during spring tides. Currents
are particularly strong around "The Race", an area of narrow and shallow water at the western end of the rock wall between
the marina and the township.  

Avoid this area except during slack tide.

Marina Entrance
The Batemans Bay Marina is accessed via a relatively narrow gap in the rock wall that runs east/west along the river's southern 
side. Entering and leaving the marina can be hazardous.

When exiting

Crew to keep a close watch for vessels and other water traffic moving along the river
Ensure the river is clear both ways before venturing out (foredeck hand should explicitly call "clear port", "clear starboard")
before leaving
Beware the tidal flow when exiting -- strong currents may take N3 sidewards into the rock wall if you linger in the entrance
Be prepare with an "Engine failure plan" -- should N3's engine fail on departure be prepare to deploy the headsail to gain
way and steerage.
All crew to wear life jackets before departure from the berth
Brief the crew on these procedures before departure
Clear the marina before raising any sail (except in an engine fail emergency)

When entering
Watch for traffic exiting the marina -- standoff if in doubt -- do not force a presumed right of way
Drop all sails before attempting to enter the marina
Watch (fore and aft) for traffic in the river before turning into the gap in the wall
Anticipate the tidaly flow -- when N3's keel is turn across the flow expect N3 to start moving sideways with respest to the gap 
in the wall
Start your turn at some distance out from the wall, maintain way and steerage as you approach the gap, assess your leeway, abort
the approach if in doubt
Once committed, proceed promptly into the Marina while observing the 4knt speed limit









